--- 
wordpress_id: 85
title: Long time no blog
wordpress_url: http://blog.6thdensity.net/?p=85
layout: post
---
<p>Wow, it's been a while since I spoke up 'round these parts.  I've been busy as hell.  Friday was my last day at my old job, and I'm starting my new job on Monday.  This past week was just about as hectic a work week as I've ever had.  Even though I gave my old job three weeks notice, they kind of squandered two of them and saved just about all my tasking to the last week, so I was scrambling to get stuff done all week.  But now it's finally all over, and I can look forward to getting my teeth cut on some hardcore .ASP, Java, and .NET programming.  I can't wait to be doing programming on a more regular basis, rather than this fucking Systems Analysis stuff I was doing.</p><p>Some disappointing news: my friends, <a href="http://brotherspast.com">Brothers Past</a>, said that they can't play my bachelor-esque party (I'm just throwing a party before the wedding, no strippers or anything tacky, so it's not REALLY a bachelor party - and especially since Tasha will be there).  So I think my best man <a href="http://www.mattwalters.net">Matt</a> will be setting up a party in Richmond with <a href="http://coppersails.com">Copper Sails</a>.  I've seen them twice and enjoyed their music each time, and it should be a hell of a lot cheaper and easier to put on than BP. </p><p>Generally speaking, wedding planning is getting hot and heavy.  We're putting deposits down on everything and starting to collect money from people.  Tasha designed the invitations and they're going into production - she came up with a neat design and is doing them herself!</p><p>We've got lots of stuff to do still, though, so forgive me if I'm not blogging here as often.  We hit the trifecta - new job, moving (to Richmond starting July 15 - just put down an $1100 deposit, ugh), AND getting married.  If I can squeeze some blogtime in, I'm sure there will be a lot to talk about!  And of course, things are starting to get a little interesting in the outside world, what with Bush, Iraq, and that never ending debacle.  So stay tuned to Social Memory Complex - it's going to be a wet and wild summer*!!!</p><p><font size=1><i>* who knows, I might get some strippers.</i></font></p>
