--- 
wordpress_id: 843
title: Community Eradication
wordpress_url: http://blog.6thdensity.net/?p=843
layout: post
---
<p><a href="http://www.november.org/razorwire/rzold/09/0901.html">The feds are declaring war on Appalachia</a> by designating 65 counties as constituting a "<a href="http://0-www.ncjrs.gov.mill1.sjlibrary.org/ondcppubs/publications/enforce/hidta2001/appl-fs.html">High Intensity Drug Trafficking Area</a>". It has long been known that marijuana cultivation and sale in that area is big business, <a href="http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9D00EFDA1738F93BA15751C0A9679C8B63&n=Top/Reference/Times%20Topics/Subjects/M/Marijuana">bringing in over $4 billion annually</a> from top dollar east coast markets to one of America's most impoverished regions. With a war on terror going on, targeting poor, rural people is a curious allocation of scarce funds.</p><p>Now, for the feds to summon this level of coordination among the alphabet soup of local, state, and federal law enforcement organizations, they must perceive a huge problem.  Usually, these kinds of major drug economies revolve around violence: brutal drug cartels that paralyze communities with fear, leave a trail of bodies, and force helpless local communities to appeal for federal intervention. So is that the case?</p><p>No, the problem is that the trafficking is <em>too peaceful</em>:<blockquote><p>In the official "Appalachia HIDTA FY 98 - Threat Abstract," the Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP) states that Appalachia warrants a federal crackdown because "in this tri-state area financial development is limited, poverty is rampant, and jobs are few. Marijuana has become a substantial component of the local economy, surpassing even tobacco as the largest cash crop. This has contributed to a high level of community acceptance of marijuana production, distribution, and consumption. Many honest local merchants do not recognize signs of illegal drug enterprises and in effect help launder drug proceeds. In such an environment eradication and interdiction efforts are difficult, as is obtaining intelligence, indictments, or an unbiased jury." In other words, people are poor, locals are not that concerned about residents who are doing this, and people are not informing on their friends and neighbors to the extent that the government desires.</p></blockquote>The problem is <em>too much community</em>! Yet again, <a href="http://blog.6thdensity.net/?p=757">government targets organic human association</a>, seeking to replace it with an occupation culture of snitches, arbitrary searches and seizures, and the impunity of bureaucratic carpetbagging.  They will tear whole communities to shreds - all in the name of keeping people from getting high.</p><p>However, it sounds like these kinds of invasive enforcement programs have resulted in a citizen backlash in the past:<blockquote><p>In Northern California, residents have turned out to oppose aggressive marijuana eradication, because of the negative community impact it has. Forming "Citizens Observation Groups," locals have documented government helicopters violating federal laws on flying altitude; environmental regulations; endangered species protection; and kept track of illegal search and seizure operations including the number of children that have been terrified by the men with face paint and automatic guns. More importantly, by documenting police actions, they have been able to raise awareness within their own communities and present a united front to their local government. This united front eventually lead to county supervisors voting to reject funding for the program.</p></blockquote>If there was ever a <a href="http://agorism.info/counter-economics">countereconomic</a> battlefield worth fighting on, this is it. We left libertarians should keep an eye on this issue.</p>
