--- 
wordpress_id: 467
title: "Right Thinking Girl: NYT should give al Qaeda equal propaganda"
wordpress_url: http://blog.6thdensity.net/?p=467
layout: post
---
<p>In her latest, RTG <a href="http://rightthinkinggirl.com/2006/07/03/rumsfelds-privacy-vs-bin-ladens/">laments</a> the preference the New York Times gives al Qaeda "secrets":</p>
<blockquote>
<p>Over the weekend when newspapers were clamoring to publish details of the terror banking plan, not a single one posted the website name where the new bin Laden tape was allegedly published.  Quick research shows that no website has ever been named when bin Laden or other al Qaeda thugs decide to go to the Webs.  Is this a quaint hold over of ‘privacy’?   Are the websites a secret?  Like the kind that we had before the NYT began publishing them all?  Why not leak one of the enemy’s secrets?</p>
</blockquote>
<p>Yet I'm confused.  The terror banking plan was a secret the government was trying to keep in order to better accomplish their surveillance goals.  By contrast, the new bin Laden tap is designed to be diseminated - it's propaganda.  What, pray tell, is the point of having secret propaganda?  Maybe this is a new PsyOps term with which I'm unfamiliar.</p>
<p>Let me try to get this straight: is RTG actually calling for the NYT to give equal propaganda time to al Qaeda that they gave to the Administration (think <a href="http://www.huffingtonpost.com/larisa-alexandrovna/judith-miller-the-patro_b_3778.html">Judith Miller</a>)?  Because so far as I can tell they're not keeping any secrets (putting aside the fact that the military and intelligence wings have a hard enough time collecting enemy secrets to begin with).  Rather, they're simply not reporting al Qaeda P.R. materials.  Is this a problem, RTG?  Why?</p>
<p>Maybe it has something to do with the news that <a href="http://www.consortiumnews.com/2006/070306.html">the tape bin Laden released near the 2004 elections was designed to help Bush win</a>.  So is she mad that Bush isn't getting the expected boost in popular support that bin Laden films usually muster?  Or maybe she's uncomfortable with the whole idea of bin Laden working to Bush's advantage.  After all, we don't need any more examples of Bush and his buddies benefiting from the War on Terror.</p><p>Or is the simple fact that <a href="http://travel2.nytimes.com/2006/06/30/travel/escapes/30michaels.html?ei=5090&amp;en=538a0c0e85134892&amp;ex=1309320000&amp;adxnnl=1&amp;partner=rssuserland&amp;emc=rss&amp;adxnnlx=1151939045-uFw+4GYn0EatfVrFsN6u+w">they published a picture of Rumsfeld's country house</a> - and pointed out an obvious security camera hiding in a birdhouse - just really grating on her because, God damn it, we're at war?!!  Apparently wartime requires no accountability on the part of the Administration nor coherence on the part of their Brownshirt blogging corps.</p>
