--- 
wordpress_id: 1058
title: Responding to totalitarianism on demand
wordpress_url: http://blog.6thdensity.net/?p=1058
layout: post
---
<p>If you've been <a href="http://tc.indymedia.org/">paying attention</a>, you've been witnessing a huge leap forward towards a police state over the past week. In addition to the preemptive raids, extralegal break-ins, illegal detentions, disappearing citizens, news media harassment, and general displays of unprovoked violence by law enforcement, we've witnessed a very aggressive strategy of mass arrests.  Here's some choice documentation on their strategy for trapping and processing as many people as possible - protestors or not.</p>
<div align=center><embed src="http://blip.tv/play/AcuPUIWBOg" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="480" height="390" allowscriptaccess="always" allowfullscreen="true"></embed></div>
<p>While apologists for cops may represent indiscriminate arrests as necessary, it's actually incredibly sloppy police work. They just declare a "national security event" and suddenly there is no need for self-discipline or judgement whatsoever. Why should people take cops' authority seriously when they prosecute their jobs so carelessly? If national security is truly at stake, why sweat a few broken windows?</p>
<p>Imagine if this was their response to any suspected crime: just arrest everybody near the scene!  Why not just arrest everybody in the city, or the state - surely if everybody's under arrest, there's nobody to get in the way of the convention. Cities are a lot safer if you get rid of the people, law enforcement seems to think.<!--more--></p>
<p>Yet isn't this the modus operandi of any totalitarian state? By denying everybody freedom and granting police maximum prerogatives to detain, surveil, and otherwise harass citizens, a government blurs the distinction between being under arrest or being free.  People under despotic governance experience a sliding scale of captivity, to be moved up or down at the discretion of unaccountable bureaucrat/captors. </p>
<p>It is important to correctly recognize this trend towards a police state.  The myths of freedom, civil rights, and the rule of law must be maintained.  So instead, the government institutes the police state on demand - invoking it when necessary, and then dispersing it without a trace and shrugging, "what fascism?" You're never free, really - you just enjoy perpetual probation until the next time the government flips the switch.  Under arrest?  That's a relative term; just check the threat level.</p>
<p>This is exactly how police states arrive historically - in easily ignored, irregular spurts.  Those are perfect opportunities to train officers in their new attitudes towards citizens, gather data on the effectiveness of tactics, and experiment with new strategies for oppression. The trick is always for the people to wake up before the slow metamorphosis passes the point of no return.</p>
<p>Sadly, it's clear to me that we've probably missed our last chances to reverse these trends.  With the P.A.T.R.I.O.T. Act granting the legal cover for whatever our rulers want to label as "terrorism" and impenetrable secrecy about anything else, there's no recourse in "the system" for citizens to air legitimate grievances. Meanwhile, any direct action is dealt with in the most brutal manner possible (yes, they could be more brutal - but that would impact the efficiency of their actions).</p>
<p>So if we're in a police state now, what do we do?  Obviously, there was a point at which the citizens of Germany in the '30s gave up on speaking out.  There was a point at which the Soviet citizens stopped protesting the Bolshevik treachery. Throughout history, people who found themselves under a totalitarian government had to face a terrible fact: that the modes of democratic society were no longer tenable.</p><p>But to admit to yourself the horrible truth, that we have lost our country, that is the truly difficult thing.  Keep in mind, however, that it has always been through denial, self-deception, and lack of honesty on the part of the people that totalitarianism has gained a foothold.  We must be courageous, pragmatic, and most of all <em>careful</em>. The rules have changed, and if we're going to play this game we do well to use our time-outs to <a href="http://anarchistnews.org/?q=node/4857">strategize</a>, not simply to feel sorry for ourselves.  In other words, as much as I hate to say it, <em>we're going to have to unlearn the bad habits of citizenship in a democratic republic</em>.</p>
<p>The silver lining in the police brutality at the RNC this week is really that the activist movement might finally see themselves on the other side of the rubicon.  As John Robb <a href="http://globalguerrillas.typepad.com/johnrobb/2008/09/the-militarizat.html">explains</a>:</p><blockquote><p>Very cool demonstration from Minnesota of how police forces have been militarized. In addition to the five fold growth in SWAT forces since the 90's, there's been a shift in attitude. All likely due to a misdirection of GWOT Homeland security $$ and thinking towards domestic protest. The side effect: <em>the heavy handed approach here will cause a quick shift protest to the open source/disruption model if things deteriorate. Protest is dead.</em> (my emphasis)</p></blockquote>
<p>It's time for the activist movement to modify their tactics to reflect the new environment.  Flaunting our outrage in the hopes of media attention and citizen backlash has failed.  Throwing our bodies on the gears of the machine has not slowed it, let alone stopped it.  Protesting every violation of our rights just demonstrates in spades how vulnerable and dependent we are. Demonstrating and organizing just provide easy targets for agent provocateurs, infiltration, and extralegal, preemptive harassment.</p>
<p>Protest doesn't work in a totalitarian police state. Acknowledging that condition is the first step towards fixing it. Whatever we're going to do, it's time to start doing it underground. <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/White_Rose">It doesn't have to be violent</a>, but it does have to be realistic about the threat.</p>
