--- 
wordpress_id: 314
title: "110209705906843581"
wordpress_url: http://blog.6thdensity.net/?p=314
layout: post
---
Why do conservatives not acknowledge that we've been fucking around in the Middle East for the past 50 years and maybe, just maybe, that has something to do with the animosity (not the whole "we hate freedom" thing - that is just ridiculous)?

After all, didn't <a href="">the latest tape from al Zarquawi</a> say this:<blockquote>"You can elect Bush, Kerry or Satan himself, it doesn't matter to us," Ayman al-Zawahiri said. "<b>What's important to us are the U.S. policies toward Muslims</b>."</blockquote>That doesn't sound like Jihad, personally. Why is it unpatriotic to consider this comment at face value? Is it possible that in the midst of capturing and killing terrorists there is a larger problem that may have something to do with our actions the past fifty years?

The only way you can possibly think that "everything" changed on 9/11 is if you have absolutely no regard for what is done with your tax dollars to people in other countries. Politics is not about this or that group "deserving" anything - it is about forces at work that are not entirely isolated from our actions. Why is beyond the pale to bring this up?

Seriously, I'm asking the closest conservatives at hand... why must patriotism be linked to framing issues from only a certain perspective?  That is not how solutions come about - what was it Einstein said about problems not being solved by the same level of thinking that created them?
