--- 
wordpress_id: 264
title: "109414601926647869"
wordpress_url: http://blog.6thdensity.net/?p=264
layout: post
---
Sometimes, when somebody speaks the truth, the sheer weight of it stuns you.  After that fascist fest last night, <a href="">William Saletan tears that idiot Zell Miller apart</a>:<blockquote>But the important thing isn't the falsity of the charges, which Republicans continue to repeat despite press reports debunking them. The important thing is that the GOP is trying to quash criticism of the president simply because it's criticism of the president. The election is becoming a referendum on democracy.

In a democracy, the commander in chief works for you. You hire him when you elect him. You watch him do the job. If he makes good decisions and serves your interests, you rehire him. If he doesn't, you fire him by voting for his opponent in the next election.

Not every country works this way. In some countries, the commander in chief builds a propaganda apparatus that equates him with the military and the nation. If you object that he's making bad decisions and disserving the national interest, you're accused of weakening the nation, undermining its security, sabotaging the commander in chief, and serving a foreign power—the very charges Miller leveled tonight against Bush's critics.

Are you prepared to become one of those countries?</blockquote>There's also when Zell Miller faulted Democrats for calling American troops occupiers, when Bush has used that word before, too.

Cheney is such a dipshit, it goes without saying.

