--- 
wordpress_id: 291
title: "109968354031426584"
wordpress_url: http://blog.6thdensity.net/?p=291
layout: post
---
<a href="http://slate.msn.com/id/2109218/">Jane Smiley appears to agree with me</a>:<blockquote>The reason the Democrats have lost five of the last seven presidential elections is simple: A generation ago, the big capitalists, who have no morals, as we know, decided to make use of the religious right in their class war against the middle class and against the regulations that were protecting those whom they considered to be their rightful prey—workers and consumers. The architects of this strategy knew perfectly well that they were exploiting, among other unsavory qualities, a long American habit of virulent racism, but they did it anyway, and we see the outcome now—Cheney is the capitalist arm and Bush is the religious arm. They know no boundaries or rules. They are predatory and resentful, amoral, avaricious, and arrogant. Lots of Americans like and admire them because lots of Americans, even those who don't share those same qualities, don't know which end is up. Can the Democrats appeal to such voters? Do they want to? The Republicans have sold their souls for power. Must everyone?</blockquote>Then she goes off the deep end:<blockquote>Progressives have only one course of action now: React quickly to every outrage—red state types love to cheat and intimidate, so we have to assume the worst and call them on it every time. We have to give them more to think about than they can handle—to always appeal to reason and common sense, and the law, even when they can't understand it and don't respond.</blockquote>But this just keeps Democrats on the defensive, precisely where the Republicans want them.  Isn't it time for a new approach - one that appeals to the best in every American without marginalizing them?
