--- 
wordpress_id: 232
title: Moving Forward on Unified Field Theory
wordpress_url: http://blog.6thdensity.net/?p=232
layout: post
---
Per a <a href="http://www.haloscan.com/comments.php?user=greenlantern113&amp;comment=108722758304769382#8384">recent discussion</a> on the comment list, I have finally decided to post on one segment of David Wilcock's <a href="http://ascension2000.com/ConvergenceIII/">The Science of Oneness</a> work, concerning the unified nature of consciousness in the universe:<blockquote>As our understanding of this universal energy source continues to expand, we are soon confronted with the idea that it is intelligent, that it can directly interact with our consciousness. After all, if this truly is the "Unified Field" that mainstream science has been searching for as the basis for all matter, then we are also a part of that unified field – mind, body and spirit. Or to put it in different terms, since we have consciousness, then consciousness must be a functioning part of that unified field as well. This simple point of philosophy is quite often ignored in the course of a scientific investigation:

<strong>By virtue of the fact that consciousness exists, it must be a function of the Unified Field, whatever that turns out to be.</strong> 

And in his book A Brief History of Time, well-known physicist Stephen Hawking predicted in the late 1980's that <strong>this Unified Field Theory would be solved within twenty years</strong>. 

The concept of a consciousness that is inherent in the energy of the universe is no longer in the realm of the spooks and spiritualists, as modern quantum physicists have discovered irrefutable evidence that the expectations of the experimenter can dramatically affect the outcome of the experiment – the quantum energies involved "know that they are being watched." Anyone can go to the science section of their local bookstore and find scores of titles that will discuss this, such as the classic Dancing Wu-Li Masters by Gary Zukav, who is now well known for his frequent, insightful appearances on the Oprah Winfrey show. Furthermore, we also know that this conscious interaction with "matter" doesn't have to stop with the quantum arena. 

In the field of parapsychology, which is solidly empirical and has struggled in vain for mainstream academic acceptance for many years, we have prestigious institutions such as Princeton Engineering Anomalies Research or PEAR that have absolutely proven that human consciousness can affect the outcome of seemingly "random" procedures. This can include effects where the participant is able to demonstrate the following, statistically significant results:

-         affecting computerized random number generators, 

-         changing the speed with which radiation emanates from a source to be measured by a Geiger counter, 

-         and even affecting the random movement of ping-pong balls through a matrix of pins. The experimenter drops the balls through a single slot into a matrix that normally should funnel them into a random configuration throughout ten or fifteen slots at the bottom, and yet by sheer intent the participant is able to significantly increase the number of ping-pong balls that fall into a certain slot. 

It is also important to remember that the subjects for these sorts of experiments are not heavy-duty psychics, but ordinary people; so we are not talking about something that is only available to certain "elite" humans in our society. These experiments clearly reveal that the human being possesses untapped potential that has not yet gained mainstream scientific acceptance.</blockquote>I do encourage you to check out the rest of the book, as it's hard to take snippets out like this without obscuring the big picture.

Basically, the point of Wilcock's work is that a new, updated theory of aether (an all-pervading, fluid substance that makes up all matter and energy) cleanly resolves many problems in quantum physics, consciousness science, etc.  I encourage you to look at it with an open mind.
