--- 
wordpress_id: 277
title: "109828236593131615"
wordpress_url: http://blog.6thdensity.net/?p=277
layout: post
---
As ashamed as I am to simply post somebody else's blog post, I couldn't resist.  Besides, I'm lazy.  This is from <a href="http://www.janegalt.net/">Assymmetrical Information</a>.

<blockquote>This excellent <a href="http://volokh.com/archives/archive_2004_10_14.shtml#1098069805">post</a> by Jim Lindgren sums up John Kerry's twenty year record of accomplishment in the Senate:

<i>S.791: Authorizes $53 million over four years to provide grants to woman-owned small businesses. (1999)

S.1206: Names a federal building in Waltham, Massachusetts after Frederick C. Murphy, who was killed in action during World War II and awarded (posthumously) the Medal of Honor. (1994)

S.1636: A save-the-dolphins measure aiming "to improve the program to reduce the incidental taking of marine mammals during the course of commercial fishing operations." (1994)

S.1563: Funding the National Sea Grant College Program, which supports university-based research, public education, and other projects "to promote better understanding, conservation and use of America's coastal resources." (1991)

S.423: Granting a visa and admission to the U.S. as a permanent resident to Kil Joon Yu Callahan. (1987)

H.R.1900 (S.300): Awarded a congressional gold medal to Jackie Robinson (posthumously), and called for a national day of recognition. (2003)

H.R.1860 (S.856): Increased the maximum research grants for small businesses from $500,000 to $750,000 under the Small Business Technology Transfer Program. (2001)

S.J.Res.158: To make the week of Oct. 22 - Oct. 28, 1989 "World Population Awareness Week." (1989)

S.J.Res.160: To renew "World Population Awareness Week" for 1991. (1991)

S.J.Res.318: To make Nov. 13, 1992 "Vietnam Veterans Memorial 10th Anniversary Day." (1992)

S.J.Res.337: To make Sept. 18, 1992 "National POW/MIA Recognition Day." (1992)</i>


This is the <b>entire</b> list of all the things that John Kerry has managed to get passed in the last twenty years.

Kerry supporters: explain why I should want a president who lacked the ability to get more than this pitiful list of bills through the senate.

Bush supporters: explain why this shouldn't gladden my libertarian heart.</blockquote>That pretty much sums it up for me.  Not that I agree with her on everything: <a href="http://www.janegalt.net/blog/archives/004961.html">her refusal to support Badnarik</a> is pretty dumb, I think.  The LP ain't perfect, but compared to where we are, it is the obvious place for libertarians to go.  'Course, you expect these kinds of opinions from the Objectivists (I assume with a name like Galt she's one).
