--- 
wordpress_id: 315
title: "110252744579466107"
wordpress_url: http://blog.6thdensity.net/?p=315
layout: post
---
A lot of people have been finding this blog from one that I've been reading and posting on a LOT lately called <a href="http://rightthinkinggirl.typepad.com">Right Thinking Girl</a>.  If you want to explore the roots of current conservatism in a fun environment, I suggest you head over there right now.  There is a great conversation going on in the "Day of Infamy" thread about why reason should trump revenge in the War on Terruh.  I'm still deciding whether putting a blog on your blogroll implies endorsement of the blogger's opinions.  But by the same token, I've been writing so much over there that I've been neglecting you people, and I don't want you to... ehh, never mind, screw ya's.

I've been reading Sarah Vowell's <u>The Partly Cloudy Patriot</u> because it is light reading and was made available to me at no cost.  It's fun and interesting to see somebody who, like me, is not entirely comfortable with being a nerd.  I wish I had more friends like her - intellectuals who are also fun, whom I don't have to trick into a conversation about philosophy or politics.  People who can riff on the Secret Machines or Aqua Teen Hunger Force when talking about foreign policy and metaphysics.

The other day I saw the Hayden Christiansen movie, <u>Shattered Glass</u>.  It's about disgraced journalist Stephen Glass, and it's a remarkable movie.  It's got lots of names in it: Chloe Sevigny, Steve Zahn, Hank Azaria, etc.  You think at first it's some made-for-TV movie that's struggling to fashion a plot out of an essentially boring subject matter, but that's just it - I think, in this case, that the plot isn't important so much as the character study, kind of like in <u>Conspiracy</u>.  You know where it's headed - but how did it happen?  Hayden Christiansen is doing a great job of becoming the next Jude Law - a great actor that gets despicable roles and pulls them off brilliantly (when possible; <u>Star Wars</u> is a disgrace).

And <a href="http://choosewisely.blogspot.com/">R</a>, thanks for the props.  Even though I'm not a liberal, anybody who stands up to the Red State Inquisition is a pal of mine.
