--- 
wordpress_id: 323
title: "110546982257295949"
wordpress_url: http://blog.6thdensity.net/?p=323
layout: post
---
Ahh, man.  Life's been rough lately.  Forgive the lack of posts.

First off, I don't know if I already told y'all this (I'm too lazy to go and see if I already blogged about it, yeah, screw you) but somehow I injured my neck on New Years Eve.  While getting down to the dope fusionstep sounds of <a href="http://www.brotherspast.com">BP</a>, somehow my dance moves exceeded my ability to perform them, and I really pulled my neck, so that it was constantly in pain no matter how I held it.  When it started affecting my work and sleep, I went to the doctor, who put me on muscle relaxers and what is basically prescription Aleve.  Now, this cyclobenzaprine makes you tired as shit, so I've been getting great sleep, and doing the stretches he showed me is helping.  But I've also been sleeping so much (probably not getting any sleep on the last and first nights of 2004 and 2005 respectively didn't help), I haven't had time to blog.  So forgive me.

Also, precisely one week ago I slammed my car into a deer for looking at me the wrong way (and, by wrong way, I mean that she didn't look at me at all).  It did a number on the car, and so I've been driving around an SUV the insurance company set me up with.  It's a Jeep Cherokee and it pretty much sucks.  I commute 100 miles a day and the gas milage blows.  And whaddaya know, coincidentally Bush gets reelected and gas goes up again.  Yeehaw.  Anyway, I'm gonna try and get a Ford Focus or something, especially since my coverage is limited to a certain dollar amount and I need to try to stretch it over probably two weeks at least.

I think I had one of those 12 hour bugs yesterday.  I woke up with mild indigestion and really sweaty.  I took a Gaviscon and within 5 seconds I puked my guts out entirely.  4 hours later, I was fine.  That was wierd, and it's not like I have a lot of leave to blow, so I'm kinda pissed off at my body.

Glad to hear you had a good NYE, Amy.
