---
title: What's going on
tags: personal
---

So we're deep in summer here in Richmond, and things are as busy as ever. [My consulting business](http://6thdensity.com) is going well, and I'm about to start work on a few cool projects while continuing work on past ones. Tasha's business is also taking off, and so we are partners in stress -- for once! I'm even considering advertising for an intern as Tasha did, since it would not only be a chance to get some help but to give a computer science student the kind of real-world, practical tools for building a consultancy that I never got.

Last week, Tasha and I saw Wilco in Charlottesville and that was great. Having been a fan of jam bands for so long, I'm used to artists taking big risks on stage and it either paying off wonderfully or crashing. To see such accomplished musicians deliver stunning performances so consistently impresses me -- and the songs are pretty much top notch. After that we went to Baltimore for Artscape, where Tasha sold pottery while I got drunk and walked around the exhibits with our Baltimore friends. It was a fun weekend but not so relaxing.

As far as writing, I have [a new piece over at C4SS](http://c4ss.org/content/11101) on my experience with the anarchist pedigree of Occupy Richmond. I'll be expanding on this in a future post. I also am working on my "freedom of religion / defense of the pre-rational" argument. I also just wrote [an attack on a developer encroaching on our neighborhood](http://springhillrva.org/2012/07/26/neighborhood-concerns-about-the-richmond-overlook-development/). It's pretty sick how rich developers can subvert city regulations at will, yet I have to go through an ordeal just to put up a picket fence.

Well, that's about all I can think of. Stay tuned for more hopefully -- I'm really trying to post more often!