---
title: The Leftist Case Against Political Correctness
tags: leftism, political correctness
category: leftlibertarian
excerpt_paragraph_count: 2
published: false
---

As a longtime libertarian and an avowed egalitarian socialist, I've struggled with the concept of "political correctness" for as long as I've had a political awareness. I went through a neoliberal democrat phase in the 90's where what many denounced as PC simply looked like good manners to me. Don't get me wrong; some of it was just that: the attempts of well-meaning people to navigate a culture permeated with deep-seated privilege and oppressive features. And yet, just as much polite talk is not exceedingly honest, I always had a nagging suspicion that politically correct habits were something more than mere social graces.

So this essay has been a long time coming for me, as I try to figure out where I fit in on the Left. My heart is in the struggle for an egalitarian, enlightened, peaceful world. But I don't consider leftism a religion, and the impulse of many to treat it as such -- to codify and regulate the behavior of people according to its tenets -- too often looks like a movement going through the motions instead of genuinely challenging the human condition. Indeed, my argument is that political correctness, far from being an expression of genuine compassion and anti-bigotry, has transformed into a cosmetic substitute for authentic radicalism legitimating authority and privilege. The goal of this essay is to start a conversation within the Left about our means, not our ends.

## What Is Political Correctness?

The biggest problem with challenging the hegemony of political correctness is distinguishing the valid critiques from the abundance of bogus critiques. Among the bogus critiques I count the whining that comes from the Right whenever they say something insensitive and rude. This raises the question of what political correctness actually is, since it seems silly to conflate rudeness with institutional oppression.

I define political correctness as _the phenomenon and means by which authoritarian institutions attempt to keep pace with accelerating social change through top-down policy_. In my theory, it doesn't matter whether politically incorrect behavior is being addressed for the right or wrong reasons. What matters is that it is a way to shore up privilege instead of abolishing it.

Consider the example of your typical right-wing bigoted talking head who says something they'd defend as merely "politically incorrect". They've said something that some subsection of the population finds offensive -- it could be a racial minority, an oppressed ethnic group, even a historic out-group such as homosexuals. What they generally mean when they label their comments "politically incorrect" -- at least, my sense of their strongest argument -- is that "the establishment" has set rigid and sweeping rules about what is an acceptable opinion. The implication is not that they are being "censored" so much as called out for offending a social norm they would claim is inorganic and artificial, created not by society at large but by its elite through its institutional force majeure.

The point is not that they are therefore off the hook for their comments. Their claims could be incorrect -- after all, while I'd hardly say anti-gay bigotry is wiped from our society, most of us live in social circles where anti-gay language would be considered rude and uncomfortable. It seems to me that claiming there's a grand conspiracy to create a taboo on anti-gay language is a bit ridiculous.

Because it's ridiculous, however, it's the perfect cover. After all, there's no reason that _both theories can't be true at the same time_. And this is what is so insidious about political correctness: it co-opts the moral sanction of society into the ends of the elite. 

Yes, saying racist shit sucks. But given that the channels of media are controlled by an elite few corporations, the blacklisting that follows such an utterance is out of proportion with the offense. Hence, if you can label people racist, or anti-gay, or sexist, or whatever, you have a mechanism by which you can enlist society in supporting your blacklisting, censorship, or other authoritarian act. This can be used as a back door to oppressing people who say other inconvenient things -- such as politically subversive, seditious, or disruptive things.

While society might disapprove of the politically incorrect behavior and sanction it on their own without involving authorities, it would not do so in an informal, decentralized, and more deliberative way. This is a perfectly legitimate means of social discipline; indeed, our society changes through few other mechanisms. That's not political correctness as I understand it; it's merely social norms. The problem with political correctness arises from a society so dominated by institutions with their own agendas that they can co-opt this social dyanmic for their own ends.

This is why Keith Preston [calls](http://www.lewrockwell.com/orig8/preston1.html) political correctness "totalitarian humanism": it is cultural progressivism pressed into the service of the ruling class's interests. It's why the U.S. can justify imperial expeditions as humanitarian interventions and get away with it. It's why things like greenwashing and token minorities on corporate boards are attempted and work so often. It's why we get our asses beat on the street when we protest and the cops can claim it was for our own safety. Political correctness co-opts radical change to prop up and empower conservative institutions.

Indeed, while "political correctness" as a term is centuries old, it emerged in modern times as a way for New Leftists of the 60s counterculture to call out attempts to institute an orthodoxy in all sorts of liberatory movements. Orthodoxies and heresies are always thought-limiting constructs that should be hateful to academia and thinkers of all stripes. So it is rather ironic that much of the totalitarian humanist agenda was created on academic campuses, as an extension of the 60s movements success on campuses. Many activists became professors and sought to institute their progressive changes through the schools' administrative policy apparatuses. These experiments set the stage for the implementation of this approach on a wider scale via the government.

## The Institutional Ends of Political Correctness 

It should go without saying that this essay is hardly an attack on egalitarian and just social change. Rather, I attack political correctness because it subverts the organic change society is constantly engaged in. When the positive trends of society are co-opted for the benefit of institutions that are inherently unegalitarian, they tend to delay the emergence of consensus in society that can heal old wounds of oppression and privilege.

Affirmative action is a great example of this. Nobody can deny that serious inequalities between racial minorities and whites existed at the time such policies were enacted. But the method in which they were enacted was not designed to address the deep seated psychology or cultural norms that made racism possible. No, being diverse was touted as _the goal_ -- instead of simply being merely one result of achieving racial justice.

Not only that, quotas and other rote legal requirements became ways that institutions indemnify themselves against charges of inequality and discrimination. It didn't matter that no minorities were in positions of power, or that a culture of harassment might have persisted, or that whites simply took their bigotry to lunch instead of openly proclaiming it. What mattered was that the insitution -- the business, or government agency, or school administration -- had taken some affirmative action towards correcting a 400 year old problem (at least).

The point here is not that hiring more minorities isn't a good thing despite all that, just as criticizing the bigot in the previous example wasn't a good thing in its own right. It's that such policies are designed to serve the purposes of insitutions primarily. If they serve the interests of justice, it is a secondary concern. It allows the privileged to piggyback on the movement designed to depose them.

Hierarchical and authoritarian institutions like corporations, governments, and schools are inherently artificial and top-down. They do not have consciences and moral compasses in and of themselves. They exist in our society through legal fiat. Whether they are regarded as persons or not, they simply cannot participate in the debate and consensus of civil society that drives social change. They maintain their integrity through disciplining the people that comprise them. These inherently conservative constructs must employ prescriptive means like policies, charters, directives, rules, etc. to maintain their integrity as an organization. To the extent they allow people to act on their conscience, they cannot achieve the discipline necessary to coordinate personnel actions as a whole -- meaning those at the top commanding those at the bottom.  

Those instances where society organically and spontaneously evolves new norms will surely catch these conservative organizations off guard. The ever accelerating trends of social justice and egalitarianism that have swept society for decades challenge their institutional legitimacy and destabilize their integrity. Therefore, institutions need a way to conform to these trends without disturbing their inherently authoritarian command structure.

I believe what we call "political correctness" results from the attempts of the institutions that so dominate our society to acknowledge changing social norms by implementing often draconian and sweeping policies. These policies rarely in and of themselves solve the underlying problem. However, they do preserve the institution's legitimacy and integrity, and this is their purpose. Indeed, Keith Preston argues that political correctness has emerged as a new legitimating ideology for the domestic police state and the worldwide empire, deposing the old liberal legitimating ideology of limited government and individual liberty.

## Papering Over Privilege

In addition to propping up unegalitarian institutions, there is another, perhaps worse aspect of political correctness: it subverts the narrative of the social change in question. When the institutions of society proclaim a particular policy or law or rule as a response to this change, people tend to consider the matter settled. Changing the law, such as passing the Civil Rights Act, becomes the _whole point_ of the struggle instead of (at best) one side-effect of the people's rising up or (at worst) a way to pacify the people from asking for more reforms. These responses tend to bookend, rather than promote, the momentum for social change.

This is exceedingly unfortunate, because the historic bigotries of mankind inevitable require _more_ thought, debate, and attention, as destabilizing as this can be for the powers that be.  These politically correct institutional responses are almost universally superficial, failing to address the deep-seatedness of bigotry in our psyche and culture. By stigmatizing the bigotries beyond the normal social sanction, these responses actually work against the kind of tough social intercourse that could promote progress towards a better, more balanced condition for everybody.

In an attempt to arrest people's ability to do or say offensive things, these policies end up arresting their ability to learn from legitimate social feedback. They encourage people to sublimate their biases and bigotries, making them that much harder to face and deal with. We should expect the struggle against these dynamics in our condition to be painful, disruptive, and difficult. But if the only effect is to flip the tables on out-groups, so that now those who disrespect the former out-group become themselves the new out-group, then genuine healing cannot occur. We simply have a superficial change in the social taboos.

Take gender equality policies for example. The norms that promoted discriminatory behavior against women are not merely some matter of misunderstanding or meanness. These are biases that have existed deeply embedded in our culture for millenia. To expect us to sweep them away through some crafty rule changes is more than disingenuous; it smacks of outright bait-and-switch. We need reflection, discourse, and compassion to work through these issues -- not the implementation of a new, reciprocal bias to correct the old bias. Not if we really intend to get past it.

Genuine social change comes from the bottom up, from the sincere and trying process of searching one's heart and arriving at a different configuration of moral and ethics than the one previously adopted. This is a personal process and a social process, and it is both delicate and sacred. Institutions cannot participate in this, and they often are naturally hostile to the self-consciousness and enlightenment that this process can promote. But we adhere to their prescriptive and proscriptive polcies at the peril or genuine egalitarian progress.

It is the height of elitism and thoroughly anti-egalitarian to believe that people must be tricked or trained or ordered to be moral. The vast majority of progress occurs from the bottom up, with institutions following in order to stay relevant. It is crucial, therefore, that we maintain an open society where people are free to be as hateful and bigoted as they choose, because to suppress this behavior through authoritarian means only ensures it will pop up again in some worse, more dangerous form.

In a way, this is why the right-wing bigot we discussed earlier can even appeal to a "politically correct" conspiracy: because it gives him something to blame for his unpopularity other than his actual behavior. He can discredit the positive change by associating it with a top-down agenda of the elite. Within himself, instead of questioning his beliefs, he can simply attribute to political correctness all the acrimony directed to him. Were it not for this instituional conspiracy, he would have to address the detractors on their merits -- or censor himself by slinking off where he can no longer be heard.

Privilege needs honest dialogue to identify, for it is quite deeply buried in our minds and hearts. Dictating that people shall no longer exercise their privilege simply cannot work. Empowering institutions to execute such a strategy does more for the institutions, and the privileged people who control them, than it does for the oppressed -- at least in the long run.

## A New, New Left 

I suggest that the Left begin to orient themselves and their activism towards anti-institutional ends for this very reason. To the extent the Left has accepted institutional remedies to social ills, they have acclimated themselves to hierarchy, privilege, and elitism. This is the sliver of truth in the right wing's denouncement of the "liberal elite". If anti-privilege is just going to be used to justify more privilege, why would you be convinced to support it?

To oppose political correctness means to uphold genuinely liberal principles like freedom of speech, assembly, and press -- even when they are uncomfortable. The key is not to defend KKK rallies, or bigoted jokes, or offensive behavior of any kind, but to understand that _they cannot be combatted through countervailing oppression_. Rather, they can only be genuinely addresses through those mechanisms readily available to us that require neither authority nor privilege. As the saying goes, "[the master's tools will never dismantle the master's house](http://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Audre_Lorde)".

However, let's be clear: this new, new Left would have to be truly anti-authoritarian and anti-hierarchy. It is not to be found in modern liberalism but most purely in the anarchist movement. While some of the most militant politically correct people can be found amongst their ranks, they have a long and powerful tradition to draw upon that can inform their path back to consistent egalitarianism and anti-authoritarianism. Indeed, when political correctness is understood for what it is, it will finally be abandoned in favor of something more radical, more effective, and more human. 

[The words of my hero Robert Anton Wilson](http://www.blackcrayon.com/people/RAW/) seem to capture best why the politically correct orthodoxy of insitutional society is inherently a dead end for radicals:

> I see anarchism as the theoretical ideal to which we are all gradually evolving to a point where everybody can tell the truth to everybody else and nobody can get punished for it. That can only happen without hierarchy and without people having the authority to punish other people.

Let's fight privilege, not by creating a new taboo and reformed ruling class, but by promoting a more honest dialogue and reflective society.