---
title: Catching you up
tags: personal
draft: true
---

It has been over two years since I've posted about the kind of stuff most people read me for: software development and politics. Those of you who follow me on Twitter might have some sense of where I'm at. But it's been quite a tumult lately, and it's probably long overdue to weigh in in some sense.

Generally speaking, I'm far more skeptical of politics as a project than before. In fact, the spring of 2015 ushered in a real shift in my mindset, a shift that was not easily documented. The trigger more or less was an encounter with a Richmond Police Department officer who, literally and without simplifying in any manner, stopped me for giving him a dirty look because he almost hit me as I was quite legally crossing a street.

This cop was a mess, throwing the biggest "Blue Lives Magic" tantrum I've ever witnessed, in person, on video, period. Just haranguing me for not respecting him, regaling me with hypotheticals about whom of my loved ones he might have been on his way to save (he didn't have lights on), etc. He even pulled out the handcuffs and came this close to arresting me for not giving him my ID.

I was pretty angry at how the whole thing played out, but another emotion manifested that struck me as much more bizarre: _pity_. For some reason I couldn't put my finger on, I felt sorry for how obviously unpowerful and threatened this gung ho stormtrooper felt. Through some process in my psyche that I could barely even detect, my anger began to give way to sympathy for the despair the officer subconsciously was evincing.

Now, I'm a decently open-minded guy, but the idea of sympathizing with law enforcement bullies like this in any way is something I find pretty wretched. Over the next few weeks and months, something began to change in me. Work became really weird, things with my marriage got bad and I was living out of the house, and I started to question which priorities in my life were legitimate. Was it really political per se to face the pain that pervaded our society, and if not, was that act nevertheless the more honest, the more human accounting for our predicament? What do ideologies or programs have to offer us?

After all, I had burned tremendous political capital just being open to conversations with folks on the far right about pan-secessionism, anarcho-pluralism, and other strategies that focus on the political wings uniting against the center. The entire point of even considering working with those who hold values different than yours is to work towards some concrete project: in this case, the overthrow of the empire and the construction of a serious theory of what would follow it, given our something that lends itself to politics much more readily than a vague leftist set of commitments. The idea was to think about how we might better continue fighting for an egalitarian world without masters, oppression, and capitalism when the solid center had been dissolved into a more anarchic situation.

I still believe that, strategically speaking, it is true that targeting institutions with movements the state cannot co-opt is a novel and pregnant concept, both because (1) they "punch up" against real centers of power, and while private and small-scale bigotry and exploitation is awful, it is the centers of power that give them artificial staying power, and (2) because leftist politics tends to descend into frivolity without concrete targets of attack. The idea is to orient ourselves politically to those things that naturally attend politics: actual institutions with material infrastructure and constituted power, rather than abstractions like racism, sexism, etc. that, I argued, require a different approach. 

But in my new mindset, this lens started striking me as less actionable, not more. Even if these problems are not sufficiently concrete, that doesn't mean they aren't the true problems to be solved. If politics as I conceived of it was not well adapted to these problems, maybe I was starting to tire of politics!

And indeed, that was occurring: slowly and haltingly, backing away from a personal identity emphasizing anarchism and politics, with a hollowness taking over that offered space for thinking about my life, my values, my priorities, and what I want to spend my time doing. Into this void came a book I'd been meaning to read: Carl Jung's [The Undiscovered Self](https://www.amazon.com/Undiscovered-Self-Dilemma-Individual-Society/dp/0451217322). Coupled with the death of one of my heroines, Carla Rueckert McCarthy, this book really changed my perspective on life.

I'm not sure how I decided to start reading it; it had been on my list for a while.  But it floored me, so masterful a synthesis of spirituality and politics, and forced me to reexamine my life even as it met me where I happened to stand. By reconciling the madness of modern politics with the madness of our individual lives, it bridged the divide between my personal suffering and the suffering of the world, demonstrating the shallowness of our Western worldview as well as pointing towards a revolution of reconnection and integration in terms that a Westerner can understand.  Jung was writing at the start of the Cold War's nuclear standoff, but his archetypal approach to psychology yields an elegant connection to our inner conflicts and the way this plays out socially.  

Many of the speculative concepts Jung articulates from a materialist point of view made perfect (actually, much _more_) sense within [the framework of spiritual evolution to which I subscribe](http://www.socialmemorycomplex.net/2011/01/15/thirtieth-anniversary-of-the-ra-contact/). For example, he writes as a card-carrying atheist, and never backs off of this position<sup id='footnote-1-anchor'>[1](#footnote-1-content)</sup>, but he describes our deep need for an extra-material context outside of the mundane, day-to-day human condition. Ideology cannot fill this space, because it reaches down into the pure authenticity and immediacy of our deep selves, the form that persists across all our inventions of personality and societal negotiations. Writing from the early 1950s, Jung laments our ignorance of the divisions we encounter in the world situation, exemplified most starkly by the standoff between communists and capitalists that holds the entire world by a thread. These divisions are not merely "out there"; they reflect our inner psychic state of division against ourselves. Oppression, privilege, exploitation, dehumanization -- all of these are things we bring to the world, not as some weird side effect of our lack of integration, but as an extension of the ways we have impoverished ourselves. 

[I've always suspected](http://www.socialmemorycomplex.net/features/the-political-implications-of-the-law-of-one.html) our personal and political lives exist on a continuum of different focii and aren't even separate in the first place, but his care for the entailing dialectical psychic situation this entails blew me away. It really showed how my spiritual practice had atrophied quite a bit over the last decade.  I was no longer very actively working on myself or consciously dedicating myself to service and the tough task of accepting and loving the self and others.  At the same time that radical anarchism had become almost a totalizing creed for me, I had relegated spirituality to the status of robotic, ideological commitment for all intents and purposes.  I was thinking my spirituality as almost a brand instead of living and feeling it; as a result, it didn't contribute much to my life.

Over the course of 2015 this realization blossomed into a full fledged revival, as I went back to studying those spiritual and metaphysical texts that had always held the potential to feed me. I began to see that I could not truly help others if I was imbalanced and unable to account for all my thoughts and actions. Outer politics had to take a back seat to the internal politics of figuring out what brings the many parts of myself together. My praxis was the beginning of a meditation ritual that I have maintained to this day. Slowly, over a long period of time, I began to really look forward to meditation and the ability to reconnect with a deeper part of myself. It gave me more compassion for others instead of constantly seeking to judge them, and as I became softer towards my comrades and enemies, I became softer towards myself, able to forgive and move on where I'd once felt arrested by guilt or past mistakes.

One of the biggest breakthroughs of my life occurred when I started to really appreciate emotions, something I documented in my last post. Before, emotions were an annoyance to pursuing the concretes that certify one's goals. Now, emotions were the whole game, the colors I was painting with as I reviewed what seemed to me a very different life and very different world. I began to see that, far from a distraction from my ends, my emotions could convey information about my inner relations, my true desires, and my own truth. Most of all, in accepting and working with my emotions, instead of against them, I began to see others as comrades in this struggle of reckoning with the heart, and could better hear what they had to say. 

As I said in the past post, Dr. Stephen Tyman's [A Fool's Phenomenology: Archetypes of Spiritual Evolution](https://www.amazon.com/Fools-Phenomenology-Archetypes-Spiritual-Evolution/dp/0761833560) was instrumental in relating to my feelings and thoughts in a different, more serious way. Tyman clearly demonstrates that the march of enlightenment philosophy into modern thought can be correlated with the more noumenal search of the self for meaning and love. However, in so marching, it adapted itself to a narrow form of skepticism that seems to rule out any true inner life or spiritual dimension to living. By exploring the archetypal mind, we can understand how our lives conform to patterns that are not simply the terrain of experience but also the vehicles of growth towards unity.

All of this led me to take my volunteering at L/L Research much more seriously, and now I've run the twitter account for three years. I find this a tremendously fulfilling service, because my daily reading before meditation affords me copious opportunities to frame Confederation philosophy in pithy but impactful "tweets". It also grounded me for the upset of November 2016, when the empire elevated its Nero to power, so that I could help my friends come to terms with it.

I think my tweets have pretty much reflected my attitude towards Trump: he is a reflection of a national and white chauvinist minority in our country with tremendous staying power. Obviously illegitimate, before the election I saw his winning as the perfect way to unite the Left against a common, "concrete" enemy. Now I see that in some ways it is working out this way, but it is difficult to feel like we're not disorganized, and it's easy to ignore the marginalized who bear the emotional costs and physical vulnerabilities of this state more than others.

However, it's easy to look at somebody as clearly repellant as Trump and see a reflection of our own weaknesses. We prioritize the obvious, exciting details over the mundane, slow work of healing and building in our own lives. We easily demonize those parts of society and ourselves that don't meet our rigid standards. We are focused on winning in our lives and our hearts so much that we don't think of the collateral damage our ideoligical orientation facilitates.

One thing is crystal clear to me, though: my radical politics front-loaded the pain of seeing one's country go so far right-wing. Since I already disavowed our system, I had acclimated much more readily to the situation. This was not so of just about all my friends, so the fact that I was there to lend a steady hand and talk them through their place in this new era meant a lot to me. I hope I was able to lend some comfort and peace to those struggling.

This gets us up to Charlottesville 2017, when the attack on Heather Heyer occurred at the "Unite the Right!"" rally. I didn't want to counterprotest; I found those tactics more viscerally satisfying than politically useful. However, my Occupy Richmond comrade from days of old wanted me to accompany her for safety. 

What I witnessed wasn't a protest; it was what I'd call a "kinetic propaganda stunt" or maybe a kind of fascist "propaganda of the deed". The right wingers clearly organized themselves to conduct operations, not simply to go out there and demonstrate. I saw them launch sorties into the counterprotestors, and then they'd melt back into the masses defending the park. While they were initiating all this violence, the cops didn't do shit; they just stood there. Meanwhile, I have no doubt that the only reason there were not more casualties was the resolute resistance of the most radical counterprotestors, especially those who adhere to an anti-fascist attitude like the IWW, Redneck Revolt, and other groups.

This visceral experience marked a severe change in my political priorities. The idea that the right could ever be played off against the state seems ludicrous in light of all the stories of police colluding with fascists and the so-called "alt-right", not just in this country but around the world (see the Golden Dawn in Greece). To apply some form of anarchist realpolitik to our ideological polarities doesn't strike me as very relevant. We're headed for political disaster, and as an anarchist I think the most important priorities involve establishing relations with each other that can help us survive a collapse.

This doesn't mean all is lost, but it does imply two important takeaways. First, we must articulate a coherent approach to centering human needs. A lot of the anti-capitalist rhetoric focuses on bashing the thing everybody already knows is at fault, whether or not they name it correctly.


<a name="footnote-1-content">[1]</a>One of my favorite parts of the book is Jung's sophisticated way of dealing with "the existence of God" on psychological terms, so fitting for a man steeped in archetype and the expansive nature of the human mind:

> The religious person enjoys a great advantage when it comes to answering the crucial question that hangs over our time like a threat: he has a clear idea of the way his subjective existence is grounded in his relation to "God." I put the word "God" in quotes in order to indicate that we are dealing with an anthropomorphic idea whose dynamism and symbolism are filtered through the medium of the unconscious psyche. Anyone who wants to can at least draw near to the source of such experiences, no matter whether he believes in God or not. Without this approach it is only in rare cases that we witness those miraculous conversions of which Paul's Damascus experience is the prototype. That religious experiences exist no longer needs proof. But it will always remain doubtful whether what metaphysics and theology call God and the gods is the real ground of these experiences. The question is idle, actually, and answers itself by reason of the subjectively overwhelming numinosity of the experience. Anyone who has had it is _seized_ by it and therefore not in a position to indulge in fruitless metaphysical or epistemological speculations. Absolute certainty brings its own evidence and has no need of anthropomorphic proofs.

And so the psychologist dispenses phenomenological fact, with not a little bit of cleverness, given how utterly neutral this position is.  Here is much on which modern, declining liberalism can chew. [back](#footnote-1-anchor)

# How to approach politics with a focus on spiritual service?
- understand that none of us have "the solution"
- the solution emerges from the right conditions
- hold the candle, wait for opportunity to serve
- service can only be accepted, it cannot really be given w/o consent and still be service
- http://www.llresearch.org/transcripts/issues/1974/1974_0430.aspx
- what is needed in politics is a way to get at the root causes of our disharmony (Eisenstein book)
- can do this through meditation, focusing on being, becoming ready rather than struggling to do
- we can apply this to politics
- http://www.llresearch.org/transcripts/issues/1974/1974_0430.aspx
- http://www.lionsroar.com/changing-the-world-one-life-at-a-time/
- we need an internationalism of individuals, not states
- 4GW means we may be heading towards anarchy one way or another; the question is what kind.
- podcast transcript http://www.llresearch.org/podcast/transcripts/podcast_034.aspx

I have not written about the election or new president at all, but that's not because the events do not deserve attention.  As I wrote about the other day, the priorities in both my personal and intellectual life shifted a bit over the last year or so, and I've been reexamining some of my beliefs and their foundations.

Donald Trump's rise to power has been a slow motion disaster for over the past year and a half, culminating in the impact on November 6 that still dispatches shockwaves into our consciousness.  However, I'm reminded that elections are always trailing indicators of changes in public mood and spirit.  Even the U.K.'s vote to exit the European Union has been a shift that is late to the game, delayed only by the stranglehold that the state and the media have on the mindset of individuals.  It is small comfort to realize that the elite seem just as shocked as we were.

I'm writing a couple of weeks after the inauguration.  The intensity of the anger during and after the election has exceeded even what I expected.  The desire to strike back on the part of liberal
