---
title: Education is not radical
tags: 
category: 
---

I describe myself as on the left, even though I acknowledge many in the anti-authoritarian and anarchist millieu have good reason to want little to do with that label.  It is on the left that the struggle against privilege is most keenly felt. The liberal ideal of challenging established norms has always had a home on the left. Most of all, there is at least somewhat of an understanding that we all play a role in those social conditions that lead to injustice, alienation, and oppression.

Nevertheless, it's a frustrating place to call your home sometimes--not because it has some unique failing, but rather because anybody who faces the human condition squarely assumes a great personal challenge.  Our identities as individuals are deeply tied into our identities as members of social, economic, racial, ethnic, gender, and other groups. But since only individuals can engage in the dialectical pursuit, we must represent these group identities in often imperfect ways.  Getting people to appreciate our interconnectedness and the great need for empathy and compassion beyond merely the individual is a daunting task.

I believe that it's important for leftists to distinguish between their ends and their means, so that they can critically evaluate whether the latter serves the former.  Like anybobdy from the liberal tradition, I try to engage these ideological constructions and rhetorical tactics directly in order to learn both about others' ideas as well as my own.  If it seems like an attack, if it seems personal, then that is merely a matter of us--the attacker and the attacked--identifying so strongly with our ideas and positions that we lose ourselves in them.  So while it's incumbent on us to be as diplomatic as possible, since we all have our errors, it's also important that we be honest, even when it hurts, and that this honesty be applied without prejudice.

It is in that spirit that I critique rhetoric that I often hear on the radical left.  I want to be clear on understanding others' perspectives, understanding my own privilege and the role that plays, and understanding how people can engage their ideas without being lost in them so deeply that they come to view honest disagreement as a personal assault.  The goal is not to be right or to get my own way; the goal is to know the people underneath the arguments, so we can fill in the gaps that pure reason and debate will inevitably leave empty.

So this really seemed to me as an opportunity to address some rhetoric typical on the left that I find counterproductive.  I'd like to address some of that rhetoric head-on, knowledgable that I come from a perspective of privilege, and compassionate for the perspectives of those who have been oppressed.  The goal, as I said before, is better understanding.

## Men are too argumentative.

It's interesting that a tendency that incorporates the dialectical approach to the degree it does would appeal to this 

## It's not my job to educate you.

I must admit that this jab always leaves me a bit speechless.  Ostensibly, people concerned about social justice view the world and see some task to be done in order to help correct its erroneous aspects.  Otherwise they wouldn't have gotten into a conversation with me at all, since I rarely stop people randomly on the street to discuss these matters.  There are a few implications of this statement that  be called out.

It's certainly nobody's personal *duty* to "educate" other people.  But in my experience of enagaging on controversial views, rarely do people ask to be taught.  They're not asking for instruction on facts and beliefs for their immediate adoption, regardless of how much one might think it's necessary.  Instead, they're asking to be presented with an argument--to be *persuaded*--that one's view of the matter is worthwhile.  Nobody's going to do the work of educating themselves about views they feel are wrong or unimportant.  When you are appealing to somebody who holds a position contrary to yours, the point is not to teach them something they don't know, but to inspire in them the desire to learn something they don't already know, on the premise that knowing it would change how they approach and construct it.

Additionally, I think it's profoundly biased to view adopting an ideological view as a matter of _education_.  Certainly that's how authoritarians view education--reeducation camps, schooling that train us how to obey and defer, teachers that demand we adopt their approach instead of helping us find our own--so it's curious to find such an illiberal view among supposed anti-authoritarians.  Education implies a teacher and a student, that an area of study is objective and knowable by all, 


  It's just profoundly curious to claim that a variety of oppression is occurring but it's not important enough to discuss unless I already agree that it exists

The implication here is that there's an injustice, but it's not worth my time to explain to you that it exists.  If a person who is supposedly oppressed has such little regard for the type of oppression under which they suffer, can he or she expect me to feel compelled to care about it enough to take the step of studying it on my own time?

But there's a deeper implication here, which is that the matter is complicated and requires a common terminology and construction in order to have a useful conversation.  Does anybody concerned with social justice really, truly believe that the problem is that people just haven't read the right books?  Or is the problem that privilege is so pervasive that it cannot be easily observed?

Indeed, as a person of privilege, that is how I understand it: that social norms render the suffering and oppression of certain identitarian groups invisible, so that the injustice is seen as merely the way things are instead of as an unnecessary dynamic that exists for deep psychological, historical, and political reasons.  So the idea that somebody who has a different perspective would not want to share their perspective isn't nearly as troublesome to me as the idea that they think this is just a matter of accepting the ideological indoctrination, not 